Failed Backup cleanup LEP (#4334)
longhorn/longhorn: enhancements/20220801-failed-backups-cleanup.md

After the enhancement, Longhorn can delete the failed backups automatically after enabling auto-deletion.

### User Experience In Detail

- Via Longhorn GUI
  - Users can be aware of that backup was failed if auto-deletion is disabled.
  - Users can check the event log to understand why the backup failed and deleted.

- Via `kubectl`
  - Users can list the failed backups if auto-deletion is disabled by `kubectl -n longhorn-system get backups`.

## Design

### Implementation Overview

**Settings**

- Add setting `failed-backup-auto-deletion`. Default value is `true`.

**Failed Backup**

- Backups in the state `longhorn.BackupStateError` or `longhorn.BackupStateUnknown`.

**Backup Controller**

- Start the monitor and sync the backup status with the monitor in each reconcile loop.
- Update the backup status.

> - Trigger `backup_volume_controller` to delete the failed backups.

Reviewer: I believe this trigger point in by leveraging `backupVolume.Spac. SyncRequestedAt`.

**Backup Volume controller**

- Start to get all backups in each reconcile loop
- Tell failed backups from all backups and try to delete failed backups by default.
- Update the backup volume CR status.

### Test plan

**Integration tests**

> - `backups` CRs with `Error` or `Unknown` state will be removed soon by `backup_volume_controller` by default when the `backup_monitor` detects the backup failed.

Reviewer: Probably need to check if `Unknown` is needed by checking if it's possibly a temporary or impermanent state.

- `backups` CRs with `Error` or `Unknown` state will not be handled if `failed-backup-auto-deletion` is disabled.

## Note [optional]

### Why not leverage the current orphan framework

1. We already have the backup CR to handle the backup resources and failed backup is not like orphaned replica which is not owned by any volume at the beginning.

> 2. Cascading deletion of orphaned CR and backup CR would be more complicated than we just handle the failed backups immediately when backup procedure failed. Both in this LEP or orphan framework we would delete the failed backups by `backup_volume_controller`.

Reviewer: Not sure if this can just simply rely on the `ownerReference` of backup when deleting the corresponding orphaned backup resource. Or actually any other concerns except orphan resource management efforts?

> 3. Listing orphaned backups and failed backups on both two UI pages `Orphaned Data` and `Backup` might be a bit confusing for users. Deleting items manually on either of two pages would be involved in what it mentioned at statement 2.

Reviewer: Agreed.

# Failed Backup Clean Up

## Summary

> Failed backup identifies a failed backup on the remote backup target or not when making a backup to remote backup target failed. Longhorn will leave this kind of the backups behind and will not delete the backups automatically either until the backup target is removed. This LEP will trigger the deletion of failed backups automatically.

Reviewer 2: `Failed backup identifies a failed backup on the remote backup target or not when making a backup to remote backup target failed.`

A little confused. We don't examine the remote backup data and just rely on the backup resources' status, right?

Author: You are right, it's a bit confusing sentence. I will modify it.

> Failed backup identifies a failed backup on the remote backup target or not when making a backup to remote backup target failed. Longhorn will leave this kind of the backups behind and will not delete the backups automatically either until the backup target is removed. This LEP will trigger the deletion of failed backups automatically.

Reviewer 3: Will we clean up if the remote backup target gets failed? The `backup_target_controller` will do cleanup when the URL is unset.

Author: Do you mean that would we clean up the failed backups or all backups if the remote backup target get failed? Now It seams that we just set remote backup target `backupTarget.Status.Conditions` and ignore it.

Reviewer 3: Yes. Then we don't need to do anything for the failed Backup CRs either when Longhorn cannot reach to the remote backup target.

### Related Issues

[[IMPROVEMENT] Support failed/obsolete orphaned backup cleanup](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/3898)

## Motivation

### Goals

- Automatically deletion of failed backups when detected.
- The process should not be stuck the reconciliation of the controllers.

### Non-goals [optional]

- Clean up unknown files or directories on the remote backup target.

> - Support the global auto-deletion option of failed backups for users.

Reviewer 2: Conflict with the **Goals**?

Author: goal is to delete failed backups automatically w/o any option.

Author: Modified

- Support the auto-deletion of failed backups exceeded the TTL.

## Proposal

> 1. The monitor for each backup is created by the `backup_controller` to check and save the backup status and the `backup_controller` will handle the failed backup if the backup status is `Error` or `Unknown`.

Reviewer 3: Tip:
The monitor in `backup_controller` will be stopped once the backup creation is complete or failed. After the creation, the sync-up of the backups is controlled by `Spec.SyncRequestedAt` and `Status.LastSyncedAt`.

I don't think you need to concern the backup CR state update in this LEP

Author: Removed backup_controller and backup monitor from this LEP. Thanks.

>    The reconciliation procedure of the `backup_controller` gets the latest backup status from the monitor and then according to the backup status, the `backup_controller` will inform the `backup_voume_controller` to delete the failed backups.

Author: Removed backup_controller and backup monitor from this LEP. Thanks.

    The reconciliation procedure of the `backup_volume_controller` gets the latest failed backups from the datastore and delete the failed backups.

    ```text

          queue           ┌───────────────┐
         ┌┐ ┌┐ ┌┐         │               │
     ... ││ ││ ││ ──────► │ syncHandler() |
         └┘ └┘ └┘         │               │
                          └───────┬───────┘
                                  │
                       ┌──────────▼───────────┐
                       │                      │
                       │     reconcile()      |
                       │                      │
                       └──────────┬───────────┘
                                  │
                       ┌──────────▼───────────┐
                       │                      │
                       │  get failed bakcups  │
                       │                      |
                       |  then delete them    │
                       │                      │
                       └──────────────────────┘

    ```

### User Stories

> When a user or recurring job tries to make a backup and store it in the remote backup target, many situations will cause the backup procedure failed. In some cases, there will be some failed backups still staying in the Longhorn system and this kind of backups are no longer tracked by the Longhorn system until user removes the backup target. Or users can manage the failed backups via Longhorn GUI or command line tools manually.

Reviewer 2: `...this kind of backups are no longer tracked by the Longhorn system...`

These backups are still tracked by Longhorn system and managed by the backup resources.

Author: Modified, use `handled` instead of `tracked`.

> After the enhancement, Longhorn automatically finds out the failed backups of backup volumes. Then Longhorn cat delete the failed backups automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the enhancement, Longhorn can delete the failed backups automatically after enabling auto-deletion.
```

Author: not changed

Author: I would like to add the auto-deletion option bu default is enabled.
Modified this part as your suggestion. Thanks.

> ### User Experience In Detail

Reviewer 2: You can mention the UX if the auto-deletion is enabled.

Author: https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/pull/4264#issuecomment-1198845250
Failed backups will be deleted automatically without options.
Or do we still need a global auto-delete options?

Reviewer 2: IIRC, you would like to have an auto-deletion option in previous discussion?

Author: Yes, I would like to have an auto-deletion but well documentation is acceptable. https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/pull/4264#issuecomment-1198877129
OK, I will submit a new version with an auto-deletion option.
Thanks.

Reviewer 2: In fact, I prefer the design without auto-deletion because failed backups are useless in Longhorn and we don't need to keep them. I'm a bit confused about the last discussion and the current LEP.
You can keep the current desine and ignore the related questions.

Author: Keep the current design, thanks

Reviewer 3: Having a TTL mechanism would be better. But you can leave this to the next version

- Via Longhorn GUI

>   - Users might not be aware of that backup was failed and deleted.

Reviewer 2: Actually, user can visualize the failed backups on UI in current implement. Correct?

Author: If we have the auto-deletion option, and it is disable.

Reviewer 2: Got it. You can combine the two UX and make the statement more clear. Actually, users can still be aware of the failure in the event log.

Author: Actually event log is mentioned in next statement. Do I need to merge the two statements into one?

Author: Modified, could you check this again? Thanks.

  - Users can check the event log to understand why the backup failed and deleted.

## Design

### Implementation Overview

**Failed Backup**

- Backups in the state `longhorn.BackupStateError` or `longhorn.BackupStateUnknown`.

**Backup monitor**

- Start with an exponential backOff timer and set bakcup status failed if maximum retrying period was reached

> - Continue to update backup status with a linear timer after exponential backOff timer returned checking backup status completed

Reviewer 3: This seems to be the existing implementation. Do we need to do anything here?

Same for the below `Backup Controller` part.

Author: yeah, it's the same, it could be deleted.

Author: Removed backup_controller and backup monitor from this LEP. Thanks.

# Failed Backup Clean Up

## Summary

Longhorn will leave the failed backups behind and will not delete the backups automatically either until the backup target is removed. Failed backup cleanup will be occurred when making a backup to remote backup target failed. This LEP will trigger the deletion of failed backups automatically.

### Related Issues

[[IMPROVEMENT] Support failed/obsolete orphaned backup cleanup](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/3898)

## Motivation

### Goals

> - Automatically deletion of failed backups when detected without any option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatic deletion of failed backups when detected without any option.
```

Author: Modified. Thanks.

> - The process should not be stuck the reconciliation of the controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The process should not be stuck in the reconciliation of the controllers.
```

Author: Modified. Thanks.

### Non-goals [optional]

- Clean up unknown files or directories on the remote backup target.
- Support the global auto-deletion option of failed backups for users.

> - Support the auto-deletion of failed backups exceeded the TTL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support the auto-deletion of failed backups that exceeded the TTL.
```

Author: Modified. Thanks.

## Proposal

1. The `backup_volume_controller` will be responsible for deleting Backup CR when there is a backup which state is in `Error` or `Unknown`.

    The reconciliation procedure of the `backup_volume_controller` gets the latest failed backups from the datastore and delete the failed backups.

    ```text

          queue           ┌───────────────┐
         ┌┐ ┌┐ ┌┐         │               │
     ... ││ ││ ││ ──────► │ syncHandler() |
         └┘ └┘ └┘         │               │
                          └───────┬───────┘
                                  │
                       ┌──────────▼───────────┐
                       │                      │
                       │     reconcile()      |
                       │                      │
                       └──────────┬───────────┘
                                  │
                       ┌──────────▼───────────┐
                       │                      │

>                        │  get failed bakcups  │

Author: Modified. Thanks.

                       │                      |
                       |  then delete them    │
                       │                      │
                       └──────────────────────┘

    ```

### User Stories

When a user or recurring job tries to make a backup and store it in the remote backup target, many situations will cause the backup procedure failed. In some cases, there will be some failed backups still staying in the Longhorn system and this kind of backups are not handled by the Longhorn system until user removes the backup target. Or users can manage the failed backups via Longhorn GUI or command line tools manually.

After the enhancement, Longhorn automatically finds out the failed backups of backup volumes. Then Longhorn can delete the failed backups automatically.

### User Experience In Detail

- Via Longhorn GUI
  - Users might not be aware of that backup was failed and deleted.

>   - Users can check the event log to understand why the backup failed and deleted.

Reviewer 4: Do we need to worry about Kubernetes event TTL? IIRC it defaults to 1 hour.

Reviewer: Good point. This can be an opt-in setting to allow users to enable this cleanup function as the orphaned replica auto cleanup.

Reviewer 2: Off topic: Just curious. Some regulations or companies might ask to keep the events or logs for auditing. Does longhorn have such design? Or, this should be handled in kubernetes rather than longhorn?

Reviewer: Another good point.

Frankly, keeping event/log is quite general, even for K8s. This really depends on what user experience we would like to provide. For users, they can always use external event collection to achieve this if they want to keep events for reasons.

## Design

### Implementation Overview

**Failed Backup**

- Backups in the state `longhorn.BackupStateError` or `longhorn.BackupStateUnknown`.

**Backup Controller**

- Start the monitor and sync the backup status with the monitor in each reconcile loop.
- Update the backup status.
- Trigger `backup_volume_controller` to delete the failed backups.

**Backup Volume controller**

- Start to get all backups in each reconcile loop
- Tell failed backups from all backups and try to delete failed backups.
- Update the backup volume CR status.

### Test plan

**Integration tests**

- `backups` CRs with `Error` or `Unknown` state will be removed soon by `backup_volume_controller` when the `backup_monitor` detects the backup failed.

## Note [optional]

> Additional nodes.

Reviewer 4: Can you explain what this is?

Author: Sorry about this nonsense, this section would explain why not leverage the current orphan framework.
